---
title: "Llibres i capítols"
menu:
  main:
    weight: 5
---
**Capítols de llibre:**

Couso, D. (2020). [STEM Literacy is based on STEM Knowledge, Practices,
Transversal. Competences and
Values.](https://ddd.uab.cat/record/232604) Dins de *Key Points for STEM
in Early Childhood Education and Involving Parents: A Guidebook for
Early Childhood Educators Handbook of Research on STEM Education* (pp.
22-25)

Couso, D., Simarro, C. (2020). [STEM Education Through the
Epistemological Lens: Unveiling the Challenge of STEM
Transdisciplinarity.](http://T'envio%20l'últim%20capítol%20de%20llibre%20que%20ha%20sortit%20publicat%20amb%20la%20Cristina%20Simarro%20aquesta%20setmana%20per%20a%20que%20el%20puguis%20afegir:%20https://books.google.es/books?id=AjXfDwAAQBAJ&printsec=frontcover&hl=es#v=onepage&q&f=false)
Dins de Carla C. Johnson, Margaret J. Mohr-Schroeder, Tamara J. Moore,
Lyn D English (Eds.), *Handbook of Research on STEM Education.* New
York: Routledge.

Couso, D. (2020). [Aprender ciencias involucra aprender ideas potentes
de la ciencia: la modelización ayuda a la explicación-predicción
de fenómenos.](https://www.fecyt.es/es/publicacion/ensenando-ciencia-con-ciencia)
Dins de Couso, D., Jimenez-Liso, M.R., Refojo, C. & Sacristán, J.A.
(Coords), *Enseñando Ciencia con Ciencia* (pp. 63-74). FECYT & Fundacion
Lilly. Madrid: Penguin Random House.

Couso, D., Garrido-Espeja, A. (2020). [Introducing Model-Based
Instruction for SSI Teaching in Primary Pre-service Teacher
Education](https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783030402280). Dins
de Evagorou, Maria, Nielsen, Jan Alexis, Dillon, Justin (Eds.), *Science
Teacher Education for Responsible Citizenship, Towards a Pedagogy for
Relevance through Socioscientific Issues* (pp. 153-154). Switzerland:
Springer International Publishing

Couso D., Garrido-Espeja A. (2017). [Models and Modelling in Pre-service
Teacher Education: Why We Need
Both.](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-58685-4_19)
In: Hahl K., Juuti K., Lampiselkä J., Uitto A., Lavonen J. (eds)
Cognitive and Affective Aspects in Science Education Research.
Contributions from Science Education Research, (Vol 3, pp. 245-261).
Springer, Cham

Couso, D., Adúriz-Bravo, A. (2016). [La enseñanza del diseño de unidades
didácticas competenciales en la profesionalización del profesorado de
ciencias.](http://editorialhumanidades.com/producto/conocimiento-y-emociones-del-profesorado/)
Dins de G.A. Perafán, E. Badillo, A. Adúriz-Bravo (Eds.), *Conocimiento
y emociones del profesorado: contribuciones para su desarrollo e
implicaciones didácticas* (pp. 265-283). Colombia: Editorial Aula de
Humanidades.

Badillo, E., Moreno, I., Couso, D. (2016). [¿Cómo incidir en el
conocimiento didáctico del contenido?: análisis de una intervención
formativa en maestros de Matemáticas en
ejercicio.](http://editorialhumanidades.com/producto/conocimiento-y-emociones-del-profesorado/) Dins
de G.A. Perafán, E. Badillo, A. Adúriz-Bravo (Eds.), *Conocimiento y
emociones del profesorado: contribuciones para su desarrollo e
implicaciones didácticas* (pp. 155-182). Colombia: Editorial Aula de
Humanidades.

Couso, D. (2016). Participatory approaches on curriculum design: a
promising paradigm for Science. En Psillos, Dimitris, Kariotoglou,
Petros (Eds.) *Iterative Design of Teaching-Learning Sequences:
Introducing the Science of Materials in European Schools*. Springer,
(pp. 47- 71)

Couso, D., Pintó, R. (2012). Mentoring for innovative science education:
teaching for achieving scientific competence with student teachers and
mentor teachers. Mooney Simmie, G. and Lang, M. (Eds) *What's Worth
Aiming for in Innovation and Educational Change?*. Waxmann Publishers.

Rodríguez-Simarro, C & Couso, D. (2011). [Teachers' views about
practical work in upper primary and lower secondary school: analysis
from a model based inquiry
perspective](http://lsg.ucy.ac.cy/esera/e_book/base/ebook/strand13/ebook-esera2011_RODRIGUEZ_SIMARRO-13.pdf). C.
Bruguière, A. Tiberghien & P. Clément (Eds.), *E-Book Proceedings of the
ESERA 2011 Conference: Science learning and Citizenship. Part 13.*
(In-service science teacher education. Co-editors: Jouni Viiri and Digna
Couso). European Science Education Research Association.

Pipitone, C., Couso, D., Santmartí, N. (2011) Teachers' view on a new
science subject: Science for the Contemporary World. C. Bruguière, A.
Tiberghien & P. Clément (Eds.), *E-Book Proceedings of the ESERA 2011
Conference: Science learning and Citizenship. Part 9.* (Science
Curriculum, Educational Policy. Co-editors: Jens Dolin and Miia
Rannikmâe). European Science Education Research Association.

Couso, D. (2011). Las secuencias didácticas en la enseñanza y
aprendizaje de las ciencias: modelos para su diseño y
validación. *Didáctica de la física y química*** **A. Caamaño
(Coord.). Graó.

Couso, D., Hernández, M.I., Pintó, R. (2011). Unidades didácticas y
proyectos de calidad en la enseñanza de la física. Parte I: Indagación y
modelización sobre las propiedades acústicas de los materiales en el
proyecto curricular. *Materials Science.* *Física y Química.
Investigación, innovación y buenas prácticas Coordinador: A.
Caamaño.* Graó.

Pintó, R., Couso, D., Hernández, M.I. (2010). Modelling and Inquiring
Sound Attenuation: Design-Based Research about an ICT-Enhanced Unit on
Materials Science. En C. Costantinous (Ed.) *Selected Contributions of
GIREP 2008 International Conference. *Ed. The learning in Science Group,
University of Cyprus, Cyprus.

Feixas, M., Codó, E., Couso, D., Espinet, M., Masats, D. (2008).
Ensenyant en anglès a la universitat, una experiència compartida. *Cap a
l\'EEES. Experiències docents innovadores a ciències socials i a
ciències* humanes. Martínez, M. i E. Añaños (Eds). Servei de
Publicacions de la UAB. * *

Pintó, R., Couso, D., Oro, J. (2008). *A teaching approach about
acoustics integrating different ICT and combining knowledge from
different fields. Modelling in Physics and Physics Education*.  E. van
den Berg, A.L. Ellermeijer, O. Slooten (Eds). AMSTEL institute,
University of Amsterdam. (pp. 379-385)

Couso, D., Izquierdo, M., Merino-Rubilar, C. (2008). La Resolución de
Problemas. *Áreas y estrategias de Investigación en la Didáctica de las
Ciencias Experimentales*. Merino-Rubilar, C., Gómez, A.. & Aduriz-Bravo,
A.. (Eds).

Couso, D., Pintó, R. (2007). Teachers' collaborative reflections about
school-based science innovation in Spain. En: Lang, M., Couso, D.,
Elster, D., Mooney-Simmie, G., Klinger, U & Szybek, P. *Professional
development and School improvement. Science Teachers' voices in
School-based reform. Ed. StudienVerlag. Innsbruck (Austria).*

Codó, E., Masats, D., Feixas, M., Espinet, M., Couso, D. (2007).
Analysing the level of complexity of university students' written
responses: a comparison between first and foreign language productions.
*Improving Student Learning Through Teaching* C. Rust (Ed).* *Oxford
Brookes University.

Couso, D. (2005). Estudio de la electroestática: leyendo "historias" de
historia de la ciencia. Unidades Didácticas en Ciencias y Matemáticas.
En C. Couso, E. Badillo, A. Perafán y A. Adúriz-Bravo (Eds). Didácticas
Magisterio.

Couso, D., López, J. (2005). El problema dels "problemes". Análisi i
transformació de l'enunciat de problemes de "paper i llapis". *Resoldre
problemes per aprendre*. Grup d'Interès IDES (Ed) Colección EINES
d'Innovació Docent en Educació Superior. Servei publicacions UAB.

Carrió, M., Caouso, D., Aris, A. (2005). Recursos virtuals per aprendre
ciències. *Resoldre problemes per aprendre.* Grup d'Interès IDES (Ed)
Colección EINES d'Innovació Docent en Educació Superior. Servei
publicacions UAB.

Pinto, R., Couso, D., Uribe, C. (2004). Laboratory activities at
University level. *Research on Physics Education*. E. F. Redish, M.
Vicentini  (Eds). IOS Press.

Couso, D. (2002). La comunidad de Aprendizaje Profesional. Una propuesta
socioconstructivista de desarrollo profesional del profesorado. El
pensamiento del profesor. Perspectivas Internacionales. En A. Perafán y
A. Adúriz-Bravo, (Eds). Colciencias.



**Proceedings:**

Adams, J., Avraamidou, L., Bayram-Jacobs, D., Boujaoude, S., Bryan, L.,
Christodoulou, A., ... Zembal-Saul, C. (2018). *The Role of Science
Education in a Changing World*. Lorentz Center, Netherlands.

Garrido, A., Couso, D. (2015) [Enseñar el valor de "probado
científicamente": Retos y oportunidades de una comunidad profesional
docente orientada al desarrollo de la competencia
científica.](http://congresoeducacion.es/edu_web/DOC/LIBROACTAS3RD.pdf)
Libro de Actas del 3rd International Congress of Educational Sciences
and Development.

Couso, D., Garrido, A., Simarro, C. (2013) [Potentials and limitations
of transformative research: the case of a school-based intervention
towards achieving scientific
competence.](https://www.esera.org/conference-proceedings/20-esera-2013)
ESERA Conference. On-line proceedings.

Pipitone, C., Couso, D., Sanmartí, N. (2013) [Teachers' perspectives
regarding a new subject: "Science for the contemporary
world".](https://www.esera.org/conference-proceedings/20-esera-2013)
ESERA Conference. On-line proceedings.

Garrido, A., Couso, D. (2013). [Visión del profesorado de ciencias sobre
la competencia en uso de pruebas científicas (Línea 2: investigación en
enseñanza y aprendizaje de las
ciencias).](http://apice-dce.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/XXV-EDCE.pdf)** ***Actas
de los XXV ENCUENTRO DE DIDÁCTICA DE LAS CIENCIAS EXPERIMENTALES.
Santiago de Compostela*. pp.357-364

Pessanha, M., Couso, D., Pietrocola, M. (2013). [Obstáculos en el
aprendizaje de modelos atómicos: pensando el uso de modelos (Línea 2:
investigación en enseñanza y aprendizaje de las
ciencias). ](https://sites.usp.br/nupic/wp-content/uploads/sites/293/2016/05/2-2012-EDCE.pdf)*Actas
de los XXV ENCUENTRO DE DIDÁCTICA DE LAS CIENCIAS EXPERIMENTALES.
Santiago de Compostela*. pp.357-364

Hernández, M.I., Couso, D., Pintó, R (2012) Contributions from the
analysis of students' learning pathways to the refinement of the design
principles of a teaching-learning sequence with a model-based inquiry
approach on the Acoustic Properties of Materials. Proceedings GIREP
2012: World Conference on Physics Education

Simarro, C., Couso, D. (2011) Teachers' views about practical work in
upper primary and lower secondary school: analysis from a model based
inquiry perspective. Ref. C. Bruguière, A. Tiberghien & P. Clément
(Eds.), E-Book Proceedings of the ESERA 2011 Conference: Science
learning and Citizenship. Part 13. (In-service science teacher
education. Co-editors: Jouni Viiri and Digna Couso)

Pipitone, C., Couso, D., Sanmartí, N. (2011) Teachers' view on a new
science subject: Science for the Contemporary World. Ref. C. Bruguière,
A. Tiberghien & P. Clément (Eds.), E-Book Proceedings of the ESERA 2011
Conference: Science learning and Citizenship. Part 9. (Science
Curriculum, Educational Policy. Co-editors: Jens Dolin and Miia
Rannikmâe)

Couso, D. (2011) Science Learning and Citizenship. Proceedings of the
ESERA 2011 Conference. General Editors: Bruguière, C., Tiberghien, A.,
Clément, P. Co-editors: Albe, V., Caravita, S., Carvalho, G.,
Constantinou, C., Couso, D., Dolin, J., Duit, R., Evans, B., Johnston,
J., Lavonen, J., Marquez, C., Marzin, P., Maurines, L., Michelini, M.,
Millar, R., Niebert, K., Ossevoort, M., Pinto, R., Psillos, D.,
Rannikmâe, M., Redfors, A., Sorensen, H., Sperandeo, R.M., Viiri, J.,
Welzel-Breuer, M., Zeyer, A.

Hernández, M.I., Couso, D., Pintó, R. (2011) Students' understanding of
the influence of the internal structure of materials on sound
attenuation. ESERA On-line proceedings.

Simarro, C., Couso, D. (2011) Spanish teachers' conceptions of Science
teaching: identified and influence on Practice. ESERA On-line
proceedings.

Pipitone, C., Couso, D. & Sanmartí, N (2010) Ciencias para el mundo
contemporáneo: Una visión del profesorado experto en el 1º año de
implementación. En: Abril, A.M. & Quesada, A. (Ed) 2010. Actas del XXIV
Encuentro  de  Didáctica  de  las  Ciencias  Experimentales. Baeza. pp.
329-335. ISBN: 978-84-695-4673-2.

Costa, M., Couso, D., Ferrer, C., Gimeno, S., Grau, R., De Manuel, J.,
Masalles, J., Menoyo, P., Mirandes, J., Simón, M. (2009) [L'Energia en
context.](http://ensciencias.uab.es/congreso09/numeroextra/art-1278-1279.pdf)
Enseñanza de las Ciencias, Número Extra VIII Congreso Internacional
sobre Investigación en Didáctica de las Ciencias, Barcelona, Espanya.

Couso, D., Pintó, R. (2009) [Y después de PISA, ¿qué? Propuestas para
desarrollar la competencia científica en el aula de ciencias de
profesores en ejercicio y futuros profesores de
ciencias.](http://ensciencias.uab.es/congreso09/numeroextra/art-1278-1279.pdf)
Enseñanza de las Ciencias, Núm. Extra (2009) Congreso Internacional
sobre Investigación en Didáctica de las Ciencias, Barcelona, Espanya

Lavonen, J., Byman, R., Loukomies, A., Meisalo, V., Constantinou, C.,
Kyratsi, T., Papadouris, N., Couso, D., Hernandez,M .I., Pinto, R.,
Hatzikraniotis, E., Kallery, M., Petridou, E., Psillos, D., Kariotoglou,
P., Pnevmatikos, D., Spyrtou, A., Lombardi, S., Monroy, G., Testa, I.
*(2010)* Students' motivation on learning material science teaching
modules in five countries. In: G. ÇAKMAKCI & M. F. TAŞAR (Eds)
CONTEMPORARY SCIENCE EDUCATION RESEARCH: LEARNING AND ASSESSMENT. A
collection of papers presented at ESERA 2009 Conference. pp. 51-55.
Pegen Akademy: Istambul

Pintó, R., Couso, D., Hernández, M.I. (2008) Modelling and inquiring
sound attenuation: a design-based research on an ICT enhanced unit on
Materials Science. C.P. Constantinou & N.Papadouris (Eds)(2010) "Physics
Curriculum Desing, Development and Validation" pp.351-371. GIREP
Selected Papers. University of Cyprus. ISBN 978-9963-689-20-0

Hernández, M.I., Pintó, R., Couso, D. (2008) The use of findings from
educational research in the design of a modelling and inquiry-oriented
activity sequence on sound attenuation. *\"Proceedings of the GIREP
2008\" pp.106-107.*



**Edicions:**

Couso, D., Jimenez-Liso, M.R., Refojo, C. & Sacristán, J.A.
(Coords), *Enseñando Ciencia con Ciencia*. FECYT & Fundacion Lilly.
Madrid: Penguin Random House.

Bruguière, C., Tiberghien, A., Clément, P. Co-editors: Albe, V.,
Caravita, S., Carvalho, G., Constantinou, C., Couso, D., Dolin, J.,
Duit, R., Evans, B., Johnston, J., Lavonen, J., Marquez, C., Marzin, P.,
Maurines, L., Michelini, M., Millar, R., Niebert, K., Ossevoort, M.,
Pinto, R., Psillos, D., Rannikmâe, M., Redfors, A., Sorensen, H.,
Sperandeo, R.M., Viiri, J., Welzel-Breuer, M., Zeyer, A. Science
Learning and Citizenship. Proceedings of the ESERA 2011
Conference. European Science Education Research Association.

Pintó, R., Couso, D. (2007). Contributions from Science Education
Research. *Selected Contributions from the V International Conference of
the European Science Education Research Association ESERA*. Pintó, R. &
Couso, D. (Eds). Springer.

Lang, M., Couso, D., Elster, D., Mooney-Simmie, G., Klinger, U. &
 Szybek, P. (2007). Professional Development and School Improvement.
Science Teachers\' voices in School-based reform. StdudienVerlag.

Couso, D., Badillo, E., Perafán, A., Adúriz-Bravo, A. (2005). Unidades
Didácticas en Ciencias y Matemáticas. Didácticas Magisterio.
